Citi Bike System Data

An analysis of: 

(a)  How morning and evening peak times affect hiring behaviours in the Jersey City region.
(b)  The hiring behaviours of casual customers and members in the Jersey City region.
(c)  Station actitivity in the Jersey City region.

Slide 1 Findings:

There is slightly higher usage of the Citi Bike system during PM-Peak than AM-Peak. This may be temperature related. The morning coldness may prevent pospective users of the system from hiring a bike.
Usage is approximately 3 times higher in Off-Peak times. The system may predominently be being utilised by tourists and sightseers at present. 

Slide 2 and 3 Findings:

In each of the past 4 years AM-Peak usage has been lower than PM-Peak usage.
The gap between the two has widened consistently year on year, though. 
In 2019, that gap represented just 3% of overall usage, but in 2022 it has ballooned out to more than 11%. 

The Off-Peak usage of the system has also grown. It now represents approximately 68% of all system usage, up from 57% in 2019.

Slide 4 and 5 Findings:

In each of the past 4 years the majority of Citi Bike users have been its members.
The disparity in casual user engagements with the system and member engagements is falling quite quickly.
In 2019, only 2% of all hires were by casuals. That has risen, year on year, to 25%.
The rise in casual users might be due to previous members not using the system as regularly as they anticipated. Perhaps they are favouring casual usage. 
It is also possible that membership is seen as too expensive and that people feel more comfortable with the "user-pays" model. Further analysis is needed. 

Please note that overall usage of the system will likely have been impacted by the coronavirus pandemic in January 2021.
That is why I have opted to speak in terms of percentage usage, rather than referencing aggregate usage numbers.

Slide 6 Findings:

Casual users of the Citi Bike system have shown a greater propensity to hire in Off-Peak times than members.
Between 75% and 78% of their usage is in Off-Peak periods. 
This behaviour has been very consistent, year on year, since the beginning of 2019.

Members are tending to use the service outside of peak times with increasing regularly since 2019.
Originally Off-Peak usage represented just 57% of their engagement with Citi Bike, but now it is up to 67%.
Unsurprisingly, given the findings in slides 2 and 3, PM usage is slightly more prevalent than AM usage in both member and casual classes.

Slide 7 and 8 Findings:

The highest-frequency start-stations are very often amongst the highest-frequency end-stations activity in 2022.
The 4 busiest starting points were also the 4 busiest ending points for travellers using the system.
Hamilton Park was 6th busiest as a start-station and 5th busiest as an end-station.
Newport Parkway was 5th busiest as a start-station and 6th busiest as an end-station.
The actual start and end-station activity figures are generally within approximately 10% of one another from location to location.
In some instances, like Grove St Path, the location was used slightly more as an end-station than a start.
In others, like Sip Avenue, the reverse was seen. There was little consistency across all locations.
 
Slide 9 Findings:

In terms of usage during the AM-Peak, there is little consistency between the highest-ranking start-stations and highest-ranking end-stations.
Only 2 of the 7 most utilised start-stations, Grove Street Path and Hoboken Terminal (River Street and Hudson Place), appear on the list of most utilised end-stations.
The most used start-station, Hamilton Park, is only the 10th most popular end-station.
Bergen Avenue, Newport Parkway and Brunswick (and 6th) are ranked 3rd, 4th and 5th based on start-station activity.
These stations appear 62nd, 16th and 49th based on end-station activity, respectively.
The top-ranked end-point locations show much higher usage (more than double) that of the top-ranked starting point locations.

This is to be expected as people using this service to get to work or school are likely to be headed to education, business or transport hubs in the morning.
The high frequency start-station locations based on AM-Peak usage are likely to be more residential in nature.
The build-up of bikes in high-frequency end-point locations may be problematic if they are not redispersed by customers during Off-Peak and PM-Peak times.
Further analysis would not be complicated and is advised.

Slide 10 Findings:

In terms of PM-Peak, the reverse phenomenon is observed as compared to what was seen in slide 9.
The high-frequency start-stations recorded almost double to usage of the top-ranked end-stations.
Again, this is likely due to people moving from learning and business hubs to residential regions.
4 of the top 7 busiest start-stations were also in the top 7 most used end-stations during PM-Peak.
This increase (up from 2 on the previous slide) is likely due to customers hiring bikes during PM-Peak to attend evening shift-work in business hubs as other users ride home.

Slide 11 Findings:

In terms of Off-Peak usage, there is remarkable similarity in the top 7 start-stations by activity and the top 7 end-stations.
6 of the 7 spots are occupied by the same stations.
This is likely because tourists and sight-seers are more inclined to stay in the aforementioned hubs when riding bikes. 
They also may be more likely to end their usage where they started.
Again, further analysis would not be complicated and is advised.

Slide 12 Findings:

In January of 2022 the average duration of a casual user's ride dropped significantly. 
This supports the theory that lapsed members who used the system for their daily commute are favouring casual usage.
Analysis of Feb-June 2022 data is strongly advised to see if a new pattern of casual user behaviour is emerging.


 
